{\rtf1\ansi \deff5\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f1\froman\fcharset2\fprq2 Symbol;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial;}{\f11\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Courier New;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f5\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 
\sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}{\s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\cs15 \additive\ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 Hyperlink;}{\s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext16 footnote text;}{\*\cs17 
\additive\super \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}{\s18\widctlpar\tx360 \f11\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext18 FixedFont;}}{\info{\title CD WAV \'96 Contents}{\author Mike Looijmans}{\operator Mike Looijmans}{\creatim\yr1997\mo8\dy3\hr13\min5}
{\revtim\yr2004\mo2\dy22\hr11\min41}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages32}{\nofwords4942}{\nofchars28175}{\*\company  }{\vern57443}}\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\hyphcaps0\formshade \fet0\sectd 
\linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 {\cs17\super ${\footnote 
\pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Contents}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_Contents}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} contents}} Contents
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Welcome to the CD WAV help file. I\rquote m not a very handy help file creator, so don\rquote t expect all the fancy stuff you\rquote re used to from the \lquote 97 style programs.  However, I\rquote 
ll do my best to help you out.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Topics
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\uldb CD WAV \endash  Why did I write it}{\v why} gives you some background information.
\par {\uldb The main screen}{\v mainscreen} or what is all that fancy stuff good for.
\par {\uldb What\rquote s different}{\v different} explains differences between this program and WAV editors.
\par {\uldb Step by step}{\v bystep} explains in five steps how this program can be used for CD recording:
\par \tab {\uldb Setting up your audio equipment}{\v setupaudio}
\par \tab {\uldb Tuning volume settings}{\v tune}
\par \tab {\uldb Actual recording}{\v actualrecording}
\par \tab {\uldb Splitting the file}{\v splitfile}
\par \tab {\uldb Burn them}{\v burn}
\par {\uldb Common questions}{\v faq} is sort of a FAQ.
\par {\uldb It\rquote s Shareware}{\v freeware}
\par {\uldb Contacting me}{\v author}
\par 
\par WEB site for CD Wave:
\par {\cs15\ul\cf2 http://www.cdwave.com}
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} CD Wave - Why did I write it}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #}
 why}} {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} why}} CD Wave \endash  Why did I write it
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 I started this project shortly after a friend of mine asked if I could put some of his live Rolling Stones\rquote  albums from vinyl to a CD. I figured this wouldn\rquote 
t be much of a trouble, so I said yes. Turned out to be more work than I expected.
\par First, I have to make a decent recording. With a little trial and error, it\rquote s doable to find good volume settings and such, so the wave doesn\rquote t clip, and is still at an acceptable volume level.
\par After recording, I ended up with a 400 MB size recording. I was using the shareware vers
ion of Coolwave for the recording. The next task was to locate the song split points, and cut the wave file into smaller pieces. This is a harder task than I figured it would. To correctly split it up, I had to cut on 588 sample (or 2352 byte) borders. Th
is was a lot of typing, calculating and waiting for the program to process its temporary files. I figured I could do better.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} main; screen}#{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} mainscreen}${\footnote 
\pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Main screen}}Main screen
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 The main screen is where you do most of your work. The hardest part is to find all the features \endash  be sure to right-click everything\'85
\par 
\par {\b Waveform}: The green waveform is a visual representation of the sound. It actually displays peak levels. On the waveform, you\rquote ll find two thin vertical lines, a red one and a white one. The red line is the {\i marker}
 position, while the white is the {\i cursor}. You can move the cursor by pressing the left or right arrow keys on the keyboard. Use CTRL or SHIFT keys to make it move faster or slower.
\par 
\par {\b Marker}: The marker (a red line) position is where a split will be added when you press the split button.
\par 
\par {\b Position}: Is where the cursor (playback, sound) currently is. Click this box with the mouse to change the display format like on a CD player (or right-click and select one of the four modes)
\par 
\par {\b Total time}: Is the number of minutes of audio currently \ldblquote checked\rdblquote  in the {\i track list}.
\par 
\par {\b Track list}: Displays the current tracks (splits). You can rename and delete them. If you change the name to \ldblquote blank\rdblquote , it will get a default name. Each track also has a checkbox. If the track is \ldblquote checked\rdblquote 
, it will be saved to disk. If unchecked, it will not be saved when selecting File-Save.
\par 
\par {\b Keyboard shortcuts}
\par Most keyboard shortcuts are displayed directly next to each popupmenu item. A few shortcuts are not listed anywhere (especially for people with a visual handycap, or who prefer the keyboard to the mouse).
\par 
\par \trowd \trgaph108\trleft-108 \cellx1350\cellx9514 \pard \widctlpar\intbl Spacebar\cell Start or pause playback\cell \pard \widctlpar\intbl \row \trowd \trgaph108\trleft-108 \cellx1350\cellx9514 \pard \widctlpar\intbl Left arrow\cell Move one second back
\cell \pard \widctlpar\intbl \row \pard \widctlpar\intbl Right arrow\cell Move one second ahead\cell \pard \widctlpar\intbl \row \pard \widctlpar\intbl Ctrl+arrow\cell Move 10 seconds back or ahead\cell \pard \widctlpar\intbl \row \pard \widctlpar\intbl 
Shift+arrow\cell Move one sector (1/75{\super th} second)\cell \pard \widctlpar\intbl \row \pard \widctlpar\intbl F11\cell Change time display format\cell \pard \widctlpar\intbl \row \pard \widctlpar\intbl C\cell 
Since the spacebar is in use for playback control, use the C key to toggle the check marks in the track list\cell \pard \widctlpar\intbl \row \trowd \trgaph108\trleft-108 \cellx1350\cellx9514 \pard \widctlpar\intbl Ctrl+Enter\cell 
Jump to currently selected track in the track list\cell \pard \widctlpar\intbl \row \pard \widctlpar 
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} What\rquote s different}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #}
 different}} {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} different; other programs}} What\rquote s different
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Let me start by telling that CD WAV is not a sound editor, even though it has the same \ldblquote look and feel\rdblquote 
. The differences are mainly in the way it is supposed to be used. The primary functions of CD WAV are record
ing WAV files and splitting huge WAV recordings into smaller tracks, whereas sound editors are usually designed to make modifications to the audio data itself.
\par 
\par Now why would I use CD WAV instead of [fill in your favorite sound editor]?
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f1\fs20 \'b7\tab}\pard \fi-360\li360\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}A sound editor usually works with temporary files. This becomes very time consuming if the files are hundreds of megabytes.

\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f1\fs20 \'b7\tab}CD WAV works in \ldblquote batch mode\rdblquote . Basically, you define the tasks to be completed (split into tracks), and when you\rquote re satisfied, you \ldblquote commit\rdblquote  these. 
A sound editor would apply each modification immediately.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f1\fs20 \'b7\tab}CD WAV records directly into a WAV file on your harddisk. This saves both space and time. The Windows Sound recorder program even can\rquote t buffer to harddisk at all.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f1\fs20 \'b7\tab}CD WAV always works in CD sectors. This ensures that tracks can be written to a disc in Disc-At-Once mode without clicks or unwanted pauses between tracks.
\par \pard \widctlpar Now I know there exist sound editors that can do some of these things, but try to find one that allows all of this in a simple way\'85
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Step by step}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} bystep}} {
\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} step}} {\cs17\super +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super +} steps}} Step by step
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Basically, there are five steps in using CD WAV to put your favorite album on a CDR:
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f5\fs20 1?\tab}\pard \fi-360\li360\widctlpar\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxta ?}}{\uldb Set up the analogue recording part}{\v setupaudio}
. This usually means connecting a tape deck or pick-up to your computer\rquote s sound card.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f5\fs20 2?\tab}{\uldb Determine good volume settings}{\v tune} and other adjustments for your recording.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f5\fs20 3?\tab}{\uldb Digitize the recording}{\v actualrecording}, typically by putting it on your harddisk.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f5\fs20 4?\tab}{\uldb Split the recording into songs}{\v splitfile}, one per WAV file.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f5\fs20 5?\tab}{\uldb Burn the CDR}{\v burn} from these WAV files. 
\par \pard \widctlpar Steps 1 and 5 are the only steps CDWAV won\rquote t do for you, but I can give some tips.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Setting up your audio equipment}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super 
#} setupaudio}} {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} setup; audio; analogue}} {\cs17\super +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super +} steps}}Setting up your audio equipment
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 
Everybody usually has different equipment. Some of you may own expensive profesional mixing and recording material, others will feel the home or portable HiFi set fills their needs. I cannot give complete information on every combination of audio and comp
uter equipment. Most people owning advanced equipment probably know what they\rquote re talking about anyway, and probably can teach me things. I\rquote ll stick to giving tips on how to get it working with your home set.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Quick setup
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 My all favorite way to set up a computer as audio recorder is as a tape deck. The audio card usually has both recording and playback connectors, so if your HiFi set has a tape connector (preferably two if you\rquote 
d want to keep using your regular set) use it. Connect the \lquote line out\rquote  (some soundcards only have \lquote speaker out\rquote  connectors, you\rquote ll have to dig into your manual to see if you can use those as line outputs too) to the 
\lquote play\rquote  or \lquote input\rquote  connectors on the audio set. Connect the recording output of the set to the line input of the soundcard. If you only ha
ve one external tape connector on your set, and you want to use both the computer and the tape deck connected to it, you can put them in \lquote series\rquote 
. The play output from the tape deck connects to the line-in of the soundcard, and the line out of the soundcard now goes into the input of the audio set\rquote 
s amplifier. This allows you to directly record from the tape deck, and still be able to use everything like you used to. The tape deck and computer can switch positions to allow playing tapes while the computer i
s turned off, and to simplify recording from other resources than the tape deck.
\par Note that connecting a pick-up directly to your  soundcard will not work, you need a phono pre-amplifier in between. Some, however, come with built-in pre-amplifiers, so you won\rquote 
t need to have one. Usually, the audio set will take care of it, so setting it up as a tape deck solves this issue.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Tuning volume settings}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} tune}}
 {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} volume; tuning; settings; test mode}} {\cs17\super +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super +} steps}}Tuning volume settings
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 
This is one of the most important steps in successful audio digitizing. To get a good signal-to-noise ratio, the volume should be as loud as possible. But to prevent clipping, the volume setting is limited. So the optimal setting is to have the sound just
 hit the clipping level. This is almost impossible to accomplish. In general, if your volume is above half the max level, you\rquote ll lose less than a single bit out of 16, or 6dB S/N of 98 total dB. 
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 A test mode recording
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Press the record button (red circle) to show the {\uldb recording setting dialog}{\v IDH_RecSettings}. The first radio button gives you an option to run a \lquote test mode\rquote 
. This mode will do everything the audio recording would do, except that it will just throw away the sound data after processing, instead of writing it to disk. The other 
options, like voice-activation and auto-stop, function exactly the same as in a normal recording, so the test mode can also be used to test these settings. After pressing the start button, the soundcard inputs will be enabled and any input will be process
ed. On screen, you\rquote ll see the min and max levels reached during short 1/3 second intervals. Below the green waveform, you\rquote ll see three LEDs. The green LED indicates that the signal is above \lquote silence\rquote 
. If the audio level raises above the \lquote loud\rquote  level (usuall
y about 90%), the yellow LED will flash. The red LED will indicate that clipping has occurred, and the sound volume should be lowered. The red LED can be switched of again by clicking it. Each (horizontal) pixel in the waveform display will represent 1/3 
second of audio.
\par Note that the test mode recording only helps to calibrate volume levels and such. You cannot detect buffer overruns by this, because the critical part is writing the data to disk.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Actual recording}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #}
 actualrecording}} {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} recording; disk; actual; harddisk; buffer; overrun}} {\cs17\super +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super +} steps}}Actual recording

\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 After connecting your equipment, and calibrating volume setting, you are ready to record your precious vinyl album or tape to the harddisk.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Harddisk recording
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Press the record button. Switch the destination to file. You can type a filename, or use the browse button to point-and-shoot one. An estimate on available space is given directly below the filename.
\par You can use the other options too. The stop criteria are very handy when you won\rquote 
t be present during the recording. The recording can be stopped after a timeout (you probably know how long the recording will be) and/or a silence interval. Setting a silence stop criterion will stop the recording after the input goes silent for a
t least the given amount of seconds.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Buffer overrun
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 While doing CD recording, you\rquote ll probably came along the buffer underrun, the event causing sleepless nights and tons of coasters in CDR world. In harddisk recording, you can get a buffer overrun instead.
\par While recording to harddisk, CDWAV records into memory buffers, and writes these to harddisk, so they can be reused. Like most wav recording programs, CDWAV has a total buffer of about 4 seconds. If, for some reason, the data is being written to harddisk 
too slowly, the buffer will overrun, as more data is arriving from your soundcard, but the buffer is full, so the data is lost. The recording will have skips in it. To prevent this, CD WAV can run as a high or even real-time priority process. See the {
\uldb settings}{\v IDH_Settings} section.
\par To prevent overrun, your system needs to keep up a steady 174kB/s transfer to harddisk. A good 386-class machine can easily live up to these standards.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Splitting the file}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} splitfile}
} {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} splitting; tracks; remove split; remove silence; save}} {\cs17\super +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super +} steps}}Splitting the file
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Next step in building your own live CD is splitting the recording into tracks or songs.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Let me help you
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 CD WAV has a built-in {\uldb auto-split}{\v IDH_AutoSplit} function. This will look for silent parts, and add a split poi
nt in the middle of that silence. If your recording has silences, this function will do most of the work for you. If the recording has no silence intervals, as is usually the case with real live recordings, you\rquote 
ll have to do it manually. Typically one will first run the auto-split, and add or remove some split points afterwards.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Do it yourself
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 The bottom part of the screen holds the split list. You can see what split points have been added, and the corresponding time intervals. To add a split point, find th
e part of the song where the split is. Use the playback controls and the full view to navigate in the recording and roughly locate the spot. Now click the mouse in the bar directly below this point. The zoomed part of the waveform will show this in 
\lquote sector\rquote  detail. Click in this window to place the split marker. Press the split button to add the split. The full wave and split list will reflect your changes.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Removing a split
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 To remove a split, select the split to delete in the list at the bottom. Right click on it to popup a small menu. Select the remove option to delete the split.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Cutting out silent parts or songs
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 
Sometime your recording will have excessively long silent parts in it. You can also cut these out. To do this, treat the silent part as a song. Add a split point at the beginning and end of the silent part (or just one if it\rquote 
s at the start or end of the recording).
\par Each split point has a check box in front of it. By unchecking this box, that part of the audio will not be saved to disk later. Uncheck the box for silent parts and songs you wish to leave out.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Saving
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 
The last part is to save the songs you just recorded. You can modify the filenames to be written by clicking on them like you would in explorer to rename a file. The default name is the name of the recorded wave with the split index as a two-digit number.

\par Press the save button, and select a location for the files. All splits with a checkmark in front of them will be saved in that location. These files will be ready to burn.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Burn}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} burn}} {\cs17\super K
{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} CDR; burn; write; recorder}} {\cs17\super +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super +} steps}}Burn them
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 This is the part I can\rquote t do for you. You need a CD Recorder and appropriate software to do this. All software I know of will allow you to burn the WAV files to a CDR.
\par If you experience trouble with software claiming not to be able to read my WAV files, please contact {\ul the author of CD WAV}{\v authorpopup}, and tell him the complaint. None of Adaptec\rquote s CDR products had trouble with CD WAV.
\par Basically, if your system can record audio with CD WAV, your system is capable of running CDR software. I managed to burn flawlessly at 2x from a 486SX-33 (actually an overclocked 25 MHz) machine with a AVA1542 SCSI card and HP 6020 burner.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Common questions}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} faq}} {
\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} FAQ; Questions; Common questions}} Common questions
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Audio recording
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 I can hear sound, but nothing is recorded and the LEDs don't light up
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Most probable cause is the volume setting.
\par There should be a "speaker" icon next to your clock on the task bar. (If not, use Start/Programs/Accesoires/Multimedia/Volume). Double click it to pop up the mixer panel. Choose Options, Properties, and select "Recording" for "Adjust volume for". Then, ma
ke sure all the volume controls in the bottom box have been checked. Click OK. The panel now allows you to select recording volumes and sources. Make sure that "Line in" (or Auxiliary) is checked and used as only input. Now it should work.
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 How can I adjust (raise/lower) input levels?
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 You'll have to do this with the mixer program for your soundcard. It is hiding under the speaker icon next to the clock (see the previous question).
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 Recording produces occasional skips
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 There can be several causes for this. Let me name a few.
\par Most likely some problem in the soundcard driver. Make sure you have the latest drivers for your card. If you have a Creative card like the soundblaster 16 or any of the AWE series, use Microsoft's built-in drivers. They're better than the on
es Creative supplies. If this doesn't help, go to {\i File}, {\i Preferences}
 and set the slider labeled "Recording Mode" to the middle position. This solves the problem for some of the driver compatibility problems. You're getting buffer overruns. The help file explains what this is, and how you can solve it 
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 The audio is clearly clipped, but the red LED never lights up
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Some soundcards are incapable of delivering "full scale" samples. This means that analogue parts will clip the sound before they get to the A/D convertor. An example is Creative's AudioPCI card with the 1373 chip.
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 Can I merge files with CD Wave
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Merging is not yet possible, this is on the wish-list for version 2.0. You can download a freeware program to do the merge quite easily. You can find "WavMerge" on Mike Richter's page, under the "Audio files" section.

\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Converting compressed audio
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 How can I open a MP3 file?
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 MP3 files hold audio in a comressed format. CD Wave currently cannot read compressed audio data. In order to use CD Wave on the files, you wil
l have to convert them first. Note that the decoded files will be much larger than the compressed versions.
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 How do I convert files to standard WAV files for CD Wave?
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 A freeware program that will let you play and convert various formats is WinAmp. To convert a file, playback the file using the WAV file writer as output device (instead of the sound card). To do this, do the following: 

\par Download and install the WinAmp program Run WinAMP, pop-up the menu Choose Options, Preferences Go to "Plug-ins", "Output" Se
lect the "Disk writer" plug-in. Now press "configure" to select the output directory. If you now play an MP3 file, the program will write a WAV file to the selected directory. 
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Burning
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 The CD(R) I created has two seconds pause between each song.
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 You probably burned the CDR in Track-At-Once mode. In this mode, you can append each track individually, but as the recorder turns off and on between writing each track, it also inserts a pause in between.
\par To get a continuous live recording, use Disc-At-Once mode while recording. All tracks on the CD will be written in a single pass, and no pause is inserted between them. Drawback is that you cannot append any more data or audio after a DAO recording.

\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Technical stuff
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 Why is splitting on 2352 byte/588 sample borders so important?
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 
A CD audio disc is divided into sectors. Each sector holds 1/75 seconds of audio, or 588 samples at 44100 samples per second, or 2352 bytes. If the size of a WAV recording is not a multiple of 588 samples, the recording software will fill the 
remainder of the sector with zeroes. If you have a continuous recording (live), you\rquote 
ll hear a short click in between two songs, as a result of the padding zeroes. To prevent this, the program always cuts on 588 sample borders, so two adjacent songs will have no clicks in between.
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 But the wave files are not a multiple of 2352 bytes in size?
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 The reason is that each wave file also contains a header with information on the type of encoding used, the sample rate, the number of samples in the file, the number of 
channels, etcetera. This header is about 52 bytes in size, but may vary. The last file of a set may also be not aligned, because the original data wasn't, and CDWave does not add extra padding data to the file.
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 Must I clip all my files to 2352 borders? Do you have a utility for this?
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 No (2x). Splitting on 2352 borders makes sense, just clipping does not.\line 
If the tracks have no relation, i.e. their sound is not continuous, the only way to avoid a click is to make sure that the first track ends in silence and 
the next starts with silence. You do not have to clip the wave, because the CDR software will pad the remainder of the last sector with silence.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Other systems
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 Is there a Macintosh version for CD Wave?
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 
No, there's no Mac version of CD Wave. Since the application was written in Delphi, and is also closely coupled to the Windows API, it will be very hard to port to begin with. Currently, porting would mean completely rewriting the whole program.
\par However, I received reports that the program runs fine under a Windows emulator on the Macintosh, called Virtual PC, made by Connectix. 
\par \pard\plain \s3\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \f5 Will there be a Linux version?
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 
First, we'll need Delphi to become available on Linux. That'd be great. After that, there might be some possibilities to port it. So, basically, it might be some day, but chances are small. Currently, it's Windows-only. Maybe it runs under WINE.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} CD WAV is freeware}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} freeware}}
 {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} freeware; shareware; legal; register}} CD WAV is shareware
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_Register}} Currently CD WAV is being released as shareware.
 This means that you can use this program and distribute it, free of any charge, provided that:
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f1\fs20 \'b7\tab}\pard \fi-360\li360\widctlpar\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}You do not make any modifications to the software or any of its components
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f1\fs20 \'b7\tab}The program is not used commercially. This means putting it on a disk with some other programs and selling this disk is also illegal.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f1\fs20 \'b7\tab}After a 31 day free trial period, you'll either have to register or stop using this product.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 How to register
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar\tx360 \f5\fs20 To register, please go to the CD Wave website at http://www.cdwave.com. You can register online, and receive a key. Fill in your name and key in the About box (click the Register button).
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Why register
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 
You should register to satisfy your conscience. The registered version has no added functionality over the shareware version. $15 is a ridiculously low price for this program, and if you think you just can keep on using it without paying, well, that means
 you'll go to hell and have to spend eternity with the other lamers.\page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} The author}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} author}} {
\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} author; Mike; Looijmans; mail}} The author
\par {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} authorpopup}} That\rquote s me!
\par 
\par {\i Snail mail:}
\par Mike Looijmans
\par Hagelkruisbaan 4
\par 6035 PW   Ospel
\par The Netherlands
\par 
\par {\i e-mail} address:
\par {\cs15\ul\cf2 mike@cdwave.com}
\par Web site
\par {\ul\cf2 www.cdwave.com}
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} New file}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} new}} {\cs17\super K
{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} new; file}} {\cs17\super +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super +} files}} New file
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_New}}
 Choosing New will effectively reset the CD WAV program. You can use this to free resources occupied by CD WAV (like the WAV file and memory). You\rquote ll lose all changes and splits.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Open file}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} open}} {
\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} open; file}} {\cs17\super +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super +} files}}Open file
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_Open}} Open file will popup a display prompting for a WAV file. Select a WAV file from this list.
\par 
\par After selecting a file to open, the file will be processed. CD WAV reads the data, and precalculates the waveform. This will speed up later processing and the waveform display. The WAV file will never be modified by CD WAV, it always writes \ldblquote 
fresh\rdblquote  WAV files.
\par 
\par When opening a file you\rquote ll lose your current settings.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Save}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} save}} {\cs17\super K
{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} save; file}} {\cs17\super +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super +} files}}Save
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_Save}} Save will \ldblquote commit\rdblquote 
 your work. It will write out the tracks as separate WAV files. You can use these files with a CD-R mastering program to write to a recordable CD, and you can also use them with other programs that can handle WAV files.
\par Note that you don\rquote t need to \ldblquote save\rdblquote  after a recording, since the WAV is recorded directly to disk. You do need to save if you create track splits or wish to convert the output format to something else.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Save cueu sheet}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} savecue}} {
\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} cue; sheet; DAO}} Save cue sheet
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_SaveCue}}
 You can save splits as a DAO compatible cue sheet. These are ASCII text files that contain information of the file to be processed and the splits to be added. Cue sheets have two uses:
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f5\fs20 1. \tab}\pard \fi-360\li360\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\pndec\pnb0\pni0\pnf5\pnfs20\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxta . }}CDWAV can read them, so you can save your splits for backup or to continue later.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f5\fs20 2. \tab}Jeff Arnold\rquote s DAO program can use the cue sheet to directly record the audio data with split points as tracks to a CDR.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Load cue sheet}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} loadcue}} {
\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} cue; sheet; DAO}} Load cue sheet
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_LoadCue}} The load c
ue sheet option reads a cue sheet. A cue sheet holds the name of the wave file, and the splits to be made for that file. If the wave file is not already active, you\rquote ll be asked if you want CD WAV to load the wave file.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Recording settings}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #}
 IDH_RecSettings}} {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} recording; settings}} Recording settings
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Recording destination
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Usually you\rquote ll want to record an audio file. Some sound editors never ask for a file at this point, but record into a temporary file (or, like the standard Windows sound recorder, into
 memory) and copy that data to disk if you press the Save button.
\par CD WAV always records directly into a (valid) WAV file. This saves both disk space and time. You have to type a filename or select one using the browse button next to the input box.
\par If you wish, you can do a test mode recording. Everything recorded in test mode is just thrown away. This is useful for tuning volume settings to avoid clipping.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Voice activated start
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 If you check this button, the recording will wait until the input rises above th
e silence level before starting to record to harddisk. The time display will start running as soon as the actual recording starts. Thanks to buffering, the recording will include a few sectors before the input raised above silence.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Silence is below
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 The automatic start and stop functions need this to determine whether the input is silent or not. If the sample\rquote 
s amplitude remains below this level, it will be considered silence. The number is a positive sample value. Samples range from -32768 to 32767. For exa
mple, setting this to 512 will trigger a voice activated start if a sample below -512 or above 512 has been detected. The green LED lights up during a recording.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Loud is above
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Much like the silence level, the loud level determines what level is considered to be \ldblquote dangerously\rdblquote 
 loud. The only use is that the yellow LED will light up during recording if the input raises above this level.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Stop recording after ... minutes
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 If you are recording from some other media (like a tape or vinyl), you usually know the duration of the recording. Setting this field will stop the recording after the time elapses.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Stop recording after \'85 seconds silence
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 This is much like a voice activated start. If, after the recording started, the input goes silent for a period longer than this, the recording will stop. This is convenient if you want to record something while you\rquote 
re eating lunch or so.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Start recording at the following time
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Use your computer like a VCR, and set the time at which you want the recording to start. You need to keep CD Wave running for this.
\par 
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Auto split}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_AutoSplit}} {
\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} auto; split}} Auto Split
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Splitting up a WAV file into tracks can be a tedious and time-consuming task. CD WAV can help you split it up by detecting pauses between songs. This is usually the first thing to try after opening or recording a WAV file.

\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 How it works
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 CD WAV uses two criterions to determine where the pauses are: The silence level and the silence time. The {\ul silence level}{\v IDH_SilenceLevel}
 determines what music level is considered to be silence. The level is a sample value, ranging from 1 to 32767. Sample values can range from -32768 to 32767, if the absolute value of all samples is below the silence level, it is considered a silent part. 
If this silent part lasts longer than the {\ul silence time}{\v IDH_SilenceTime} criterion, the silent part is considered to be a pause, and a track split will be added in the silent section, at a {\ul relative position}{\v IDH_RelativeSplit}.
\par \page {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_SilenceLevel}} {\b Silence level}
\par Samples range from -32768 to 32767. Perfect silence would be represented as al zeroes (appear on screen as a line in the center). In analogue recordings, you\rquote 
ll probably never see this. Thus you can specify an envelope around the zero value that is also considered \ldblquote silence\rdblquote . The meaning of this value is also shown as a percentage.
\par \page {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_SilenceTime}} {\b Silence time for split}
\par Silences occur quite often in some music parts. To distinguish between \ldblquote in-song\rdblquote  and \ldblquote between-song\rdblquote  silence, a simple criterion is used. If the silent period lasts longer than this time interval, it\rquote 
s considered a split. If it\rquote s shorter, it\rquote s ignored.
\par \page {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_RelativeSplit}} {\b Relative split position}
\par The relative split position is where you want the split to occur inside the silent period. If you set this to 100%, the split point is inserted at the beginning of the next song. If you set it to 0%, the split will be placed at the end of the preious song
. Do to the inaccuracy of the \ldblquote silence\rdblquote  detection, you\rquote ll probably not select any of these extremes, but more in the range of 20-80%
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Select output}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #}
 IDH_SelectOutput}} {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} save; file; output; convert; compress}} Select output
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 This dialog allows you to write out the individual tracks to disk.
\par 
\par First select a directory from the tree to the left of the screen. You can rename, delete and create directories from here. Be careful, pressing Enter here will accept all changes and start saving the files.
\par Keep an eye on the Space box where you can check how much room is left on the disk, and how much you\rquote ll need to save all selected tracks.
\par 
\par If you wish, you can also save the tracks in a different format than they were recorded. Just select another format, as in the {\uldb recording}{\v IDH_RecSettings} settings. You can also chose various compressed formats, to save diskspace.
\par 
\par {\b No conversion:} Saves the file in the same format as it was recorded. Usually the option that you want for recording to CD.
\par {\b WAV:} Allows you to select any WAV format. You can change the sample rate or number of bits, and also use the ACM (Audio Compression Manager) to save any format that your system has a codec for. The file will always be a WAV file.
\par {\b MP3:} Allows you to save files to MP3. You also need to install the LAME codec for this to work (see {\field{\*\fldinst ref  HYPERLINK http://www.cdwave.com/download.html {{\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000002400000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e006300640077006100760065002e0063006f006d002f0064006f0077006e006c006f00610064002e00680074006d006c000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b48000000680074007400
70003a002f002f007700770077002e006300640077006100760065002e0063006f006d002f0064006f0077006e006c006f00610064002e00680074006d006c00000000000000000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\ul\cf2 http://www.cdwave.com/download.html}}} for details). Note that MP3 is a 
\ldblquote lossy\rdblquote  format, which means that the quality of the audio will degrade (a bit). 
You have a choice between several presets, average and constant bitrate encoding. The presets usually offer the best quality for a given source, variable bitrate is usually better quality than constant bitrate. The constant bitrate setting is mainly used 
for incompatible players like older hardware MP3 devices. Most devices will playback any format you choose here. The settings here correspond to using \ldblquote LAME --preset\ldblquote  on the commandline
\par {\b OGG Vorbis:} Save to OGG Vorbis format. This is a lossy compression, similar to MP3, but does not require any patented technology so the format is totally free (as in freedom). You can balance between larger file size and more quality.
\par {\b FLAC:}
 Free Lossless Audio Compression. Another free format, but this one is lossless, which means that the compressed file, when played or otherwise decompressed, hold all the original data and does not involve any quality loss. Any setting is of equal quality
, but higher compression will take longer to compute. This format is ideal for archiving. You can compress 8, 16 and 24 bit data, and any number of channels.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Tip
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 Never use MP3 (or any other lossy compressed) format when you want to create a CD. The MP3 format is not \ldblquote gapless\rdblquote 
, and this will introduce clicks on track boundaries. When creating a CD, use only uncompressed WAV format for optimal quality.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 File size estimation
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 The disk space requirements are only an estimation of the file size. Especially when using compressed output, the file size is not always predicatable, as the size will depend on the audio itself.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Alternate 24-bit format
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_Alternate24}}
If you recorded a 24-bit mono or stereo file, you can choose between two formats. Default is to save in the High Resolution Audio format, as required by Microsoft. Alternatively, you may want to save in a format as used by some programs. If you want to pr
ocess CD Wave\rquote s files by other programs, try switching this option if they cannot open a 24-bit file.
\par \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} Settings}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_Settings}} {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {
\cs17\super K} settings; recording; priority}} Settings
\par This dialog lets you change some of CDWAVs general behaviour. Choose {\i Preferences} from the {\i File} menu to access this dialog.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Windows \rquote 97 style flat buttons
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 The default is to show buttons in \ldblquote flat\rdblquote  style, which means they pop-up if the mouse moves over them. If you don\rquote t like this setting, switch it off, and the buttons will have the \ldblquote 
classic\rdblquote  Word 95 look instead.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Colors
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 The full view uses eight colors to display the individual tracks. Click on any of the buttons to change the color.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Recording Priority Boost
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 As mentioned before, in the {\uldb actual recording}{\v actualrecording} description, recordin
g to harddisk is a time-critical operation. CD WAV can set the priority of its own process to a higher level, to allow the program to get more \lquote attention\rquote  from the operating system.
\par 
\par Windows divides time into small units, called time slices. Each time slice, it looks which processes (read: programs) like to use the CPU. It will first handle real-time priority tasks, then high priority, normal priority, low priority and, if there
\rquote s nothing else to do, it will run idle priority processes.
\par 
\par You can look upon t
his as some person working in a shop that has three queues (VIPs, common people, and lamers). He/she will only serve people from the second queue if the first queue is empty. Only if no-one is waiting in the second, he (or she) will serve the first person
 from the third queue. If there are multiple servants (multiple CPUs), they\rquote ll do the same. So if the first (and/or second) queue keeps filling up, no-one from the second (and third) queue will ever be served. This is called \ldblquote starvation
\rdblquote .
\par 
\par Assigning CDWAV to high-priority during the recording process allows it to \ldblquote attract\rdblquote 
 more attention than other programs to do its tasks. By default, a process (program or task) runs as normal priority. If you are running Word during the recording, Word will not get any at
tention while CD WAV needs to process incoming data. As CD WAV needs to process only about 172kb/s, even a 486 class system should hardly degrade noticable in performance. You can compare it to a CDR session at single speed.
\par 
\par Setting high or even real-time priority will not improve performance. If no other programs are running, even idle priority tasks will get full resources, and run at the same speed a real-time priority process would run. Thus, if your system isn\rquote 
t capable of the 172k/s transfer, this option will not help.
\par 
\par If you feel the need, you can even go for real-time. This will give CDWAV even more priority than for example the mouse cursor.
\par 
\par The default is high-priority.
\par \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Problem solving
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 CDWAV can use three different methods to handle incoming wave data during a recording. The default setting is the best in terms of reliability and performance, but I\rquote ve seen a system where this method didn\rquote 
t function at all, resulting in a complete lockup of the program. The middle setting can fix this problem, and the left setting is intended as a last resort, but should work on any system.
\par For insiders, the default method (max performance) sends acknowledges directly to the thread. The middle option uses a callback function, which in turn will send the message to t
he thread. The max compatibility setting uses window messages to communicate with the driver, and causes the most overhead.
\par \pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \page {\cs17\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super $} File Associations}} {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #}
 IDH_FileAssociate}} {\cs17\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super K} file; associate; extension; install}} File Associations
\par \pard\plain \widctlpar \f5\fs20 The Windows Explorer program (shell) has a possibility to associate programs with certain extensions. This dialog allows you to register WAV files for use with CDWave.
\par 
\par {\b Register "Open with CDWave" for .WAV files
\par }This option registers CDWave for wave file. If you have already associated another program (such as Media Player) with WAV files, that association will remain intact.
\par 
\par {\b Set as default action
\par }If you check the "Set as default action" box, "Open with CDWave" will become the default action for WAV files, meaning that double-clicking a WAV file will open it in CDWave.\page {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super 
#} IDH_RegCDWAV}} This option registers CDWave for wave file. If you have already associated another program (such as Media Player) with WAV files, that association will remain intact.
\par \page {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #} IDH_RegCDWAVDef}} If you check th
e "Set as default action" box, "Open with CDWave" will become the default action for WAV files, meaning that double-clicking a WAV file will open it in CDWave.\page {\cs17\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f5\fs20 {\cs17\super #}
 IDG_RegCDWAVDlg}} The Windows Explorer program (shell) has a possibility to associate programs with certain extensions. This dialog allows you to register WAV files for use with CDWave.
\par }